create western grid plss blog post (#1037)
agrc/gis.utah.gov: _posts/2019-02-25-the-western-grid.md

---
title: The Western Grid, Explained
author:
  display_name: Greg Bunce
  email: gbunce@utah.gov
date: 2019-02-24 08:00:00
categories:
  - Featured
tags:
  - plss
  - history
---

<figure class="caption caption--right">
  <a href="{{ "/images/SaltLakeHistoric.jpg" | prepend: site.baseurl }}" title="click to see the full sized image">
    <img src="{{ "/images/SaltLakeHistoric_sm.jpg" | prepend: site.baseurl }}" alt="1891 Salt Lake City Bird's Eye View">
  </a>

>   <figcaption class="caption__text">Fig 1: 1891 Salt Lake City Bird's Eye View</figcaption>

Reviewer: Also, @steveoh I'll leave this to you because I have no idea how to do it. Figure 1 should be footnote 1, and the footnote should be: 

American Publishing Company, “Salt Lake City 1891 Bird's Eye View,” Historic Map Works, Residential Genealogy, accessed March 1, 2019. http://www.historicmapworks.com/Atlas/US/9286/Salt+Lake+City+1891+Bird%27s+Eye+View/.

Reviewer 2: a quick search through kramdown shows how to do it. https://kramdown.gettalong.org/quickref.html#footnotes

</figure>

Have you ever wondered why the patterns of development in the Western United States are so orthogonal (i.e., "right-angled")? Pan around a map and you'll see the confines of the grid just about everywhere. Grid-like development is nothing new - it can be traced back to early developments in the Middle East. But, why is it so prevalent in the West?

It turns out this gridiron pattern is connected to a 17th-century mathematician, the Treaty of Paris, and Thomas Jefferson. Yup, there's definitely a connection here, which also helps explain the West's notoriously wide streets and big city blocks, as well as our nation’s entangled dependence on feet, yards, and miles (i.e., the United States customary units). Read on and we will explore the Western Grid more.

## The Survey Chain
{: .text-left}

<figure class="caption caption--right">

>   <img src="{{ "/images/GunterChain.png" | prepend: site.baseurl }}" alt="Gunter Chain" />

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  <img src="{{ "/images/GunterChain2_reduced.jpg" | prepend: site.baseurl }}" alt="Gunter Chain" />
```

Reviewer: K, @gregbunce ,let's see whether that fixed it!

>   <figcaption class="caption__text">Fig 2: Gunter Chain</figcaption>

Reviewer: K, this should be footnote 2 (and the new/updated image that I added). Footnote should be: 

“Gunter Chain,” (image) John Johnson (owner), Smithsonian National Museum of American History, accessed March 01, 2019. http://americanhistory.si.edu/collections/search/object/nmah_761634.

Author: @atribolet the image seems to be missing in the preview.  maybe it's the space in the image file name?

Because of its ease in calculations, the Gunter Chain was quickly adopted and became widely used for surveying and land management records. We’ll see its lasting effect as we begin to look closer at the Western United States grid.

The Gunter Chain made its way across the Atlantic with the early colonists. It was so popular that the acre, noted in the Articles of Confederation (1781), was declared the standard unit of land measurement for the new nation.

## Standard Units of Measure (The Acre)
{: .text-left}

<figure class="caption caption--right">
  <img src="{{ "/images/NorthwestTerritory.png" | prepend: site.baseurl }}" alt="Northwest Territory" />

>   <figcaption class="caption__text">Fig 3: Northwest Territory</figcaption>

Reviewer: Footnote 3: 

Golbez, “States and Territories of the United States of America August 7 1789 to April 2 1790,” Wikipedia, “Northwest Territory” page, accessed March 1, 2019. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Northwest_Territory.

</figure>

Okay, let’s jump ahead to 1783 and the Treaty of Paris. At this point in American history, the thirteen original colonies just pulled off the seemingly impossible and defeated the British Empire, ending their colonial rule. This treaty marked the official end of the Revolutionary War and the beginning of independent American governance. In addition to the thirteen colonies, a large swath of land referred to as the Northwestern Territory (Fig 3), was ceded to the United States. This was good news to a new nation carrying a sizable amount of wartime debt. Fortunately, the largely, uninhabited Northwest Territory could be divided and sold off in sections (parcels) to generate revenue for the new nation. Though, first, this land had to be surveyed.

The early American Congress further solidified the acre as the official unit of land measurement with the Land Ordinance of 1785 and the resulting North West Ordinance of 1787. These ordinances provided the framework of the public lands and the procedures for organizing territorial lands west of the Application Mountains.

## Public Land Survey System
{: .text-left}

> I know, I know… that was probably more history than you were looking for, but really, that’s the annotated, crash-course for understanding the basis of the present-day Public Land Survey System (PLSS) (Fig 4). This system was originally proposed by Thomas Jefferson, and was mandated by Congress to oversee the cadastral surveys of the public lands. Essentially, it was set up to facilitate the transfer of Federal lands to private citizens. The Bureau of Land Management (BLM) is the official record keeper of the surveys. Over the past 200 years, almost 1.5 billion acres have been surveyed into townships (and ranges) and sections. These surveys were conducted primarily west of the original thirteen colonies and north of Texas (Texas has Spanish roots and Spanish land grants).  Presently, areas of Alaska are still being surveyed.

Reviewer: Footnote 4 (for Figure 4): 
United States Bureau of Land Management, “Principal Meridians and Base Lines,” US Geological Survey, updated January 18, 2018, accessed March 01, 2019.  https://nationalmap.gov/small_scale/a_plss.html.

  <a href="{{ "/images/principal_meridians.png" | prepend: site.baseurl }}" title="click to see the full sized image">
    <img src="{{ "/images/principal_meridians_sm.png" | prepend: site.baseurl }}" alt="PLSS Principal Meridians">
  </a>

>   <p class="caption-text">Fig 4: PLSS Principal Meridians</p>

Reviewer: Any chance we could make figure 4 on the left and fig 5 on  the right? That would seem to make more sense logically.

Author: @steveoh do you know how to do that?  I spent a bunch of time trying to figure that, too and I got nowhere.  I settled on just leaving it.

Reviewer 2: yes I know how to do that.

</div>
<div class="caption">
  <img src="{{ "/images/salt_lake_meridian.png" | prepend: site.baseurl }}" alt="Salt Lake Meridian" />
  <p class="caption-text">Fig 5: Salt Lake Meridian</p>
</div>

> As with any measuring system, you need a starting point. Within the PLSS, this is called the Principal Meridian. In Utah, this location is in Salt Lake City at Main Street and South Temple (Fig 5). All official surveys in Utah have an underlying reference to this point. In other words, every Township and Section in Utah is either North, South, East, or West of this location. Other PLSS states have their own unique principal meridians (Fig 4).

Reviewer: Footnote 5 (For Figure 5): 
“Great Salt Lake Meridian/Base Marker,” HowderFamily.com, updated August 13, 2013, accessed March 01, 2019. https://www.howderfamily.com/travel/utah/great-salt-lake-base-and-meridian.html.

> The Townships are made up of six square miles, with each square mile known as a Section. These Sections are eventually subdivided down to an acre by way of Half Sections, Quarter Sections, Quarter-Quarter Sections, etc. (Fig 6). An acre, again, is simply 10 square chains - and there are 640 acres in a Section (a square-mile) or 40 acres in a quarter-quarter section. Hence the phrase, “40 acres and mule” is all you needed to be self-sufficient.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Townships are made up of six square miles, with each square mile known as a section. These sections are eventually subdivided down to an acre by way of half sections, quarter sections, quarter-quarter sections, etc. (Fig 6). An acre, again, is simply 10 square chains, and there are 640 acres in a section (i.e., a square-mile) or 40 acres in a quarter-quarter section. Hence the phrase, “40 acres and mule” is all you needed to be self-sufficient.
```

> The Townships are made up of six square miles, with each square mile known as a Section. These Sections are eventually subdivided down to an acre by way of Half Sections, Quarter Sections, Quarter-Quarter Sections, etc. (Fig 6). An acre, again, is simply 10 square chains - and there are 640 acres in a Section (a square-mile) or 40 acres in a quarter-quarter section. Hence the phrase, “40 acres and mule” is all you needed to be self-sufficient.

Reviewer: Footnote 6 (For Figure 6): 
“US Public Land Survey System,” (image), San Francisco Estuary Institute & The Aquatic Science Center, accessed March 01, 2019. https://www.sfei.org/it/gis/map-interpretation/projections-and-survey-systems#sthash.D2D94lF3.sWlKZBU3.dpbs.

  <img src="{{ "/images/townships_sections.png" | prepend: site.baseurl }}" alt="Townships and Sections" />
  <p class="caption-text">Fig 6: Townships, Ranges and Sections</p>
</div>

> No matter how you shake it, though, land measurements in the West are consistently divisible by the magic 66 foot Gunter Chain. You’ll see its effect everywhere. This measuring unit was so successful because it made the math easy - and many early surveyors had a shaky grasp of mathematics and they were required to work quickly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
No matter how you shake it, though, land measurements in the West are consistently divisible by the magic 66-foot Gunter Chain. You’ll see its effect everywhere. This measuring unit was so successful because it made the math easy---and many early surveyors had a shaky grasp of mathematics and were required to work quickly.
```

> These early surveyors typically placed a permanent monument at Section and Quarter-Section corners. These markers are still heavily used today and are the starting point for almost every Western legal description you’ll encounter - including land deeds (the transfer of private property), water rights (well locations), taxing areas, municipal annexations - and consequently voting districts. Because of this, it has been difficult for the US to adopt the International System of Units (the modern metric system).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These early surveyors typically placed a permanent monument at section and quarter-section corners. These markers are still heavily used today and are the starting point for almost every Western legal description you’ll encounter, including land deeds (the transfer of private property), water rights (well locations), and taxing areas, as well as municipal annexations and, consequently, voting districts. Because of this, it has been difficult for the US to adopt the International System of Units (i.e., the modern metric system).
```

> It is precisely this survey pattern that explains why the Western United States is so orthogonal. Although the grid is not unique to the West, it's certainly at the core of all land sales and as a result it influences many development patterns. Let’s look at a few examples.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is precisely this survey pattern that explains why the Western United States is so orthogonal. Although the grid is not unique to the West, it's certainly at the core of all land sales and, as a result, it influences many development patterns. Let’s look at a few examples.
```

## The Western Grid
{: .text-left}

<div style="display: block">
  <div class="caption">
    <a href="{{ "/images/plat_of_zion.png" | prepend: site.baseurl }}" title="click to see the full sized image">
      <img src="{{ "/images/plat_of_zion_sm.png" | prepend: site.baseurl }}" alt="Plat of Zion">
    </a>
    <p class="caption-text">Fig 7: Plat of Zion</p>

>   </div>

Reviewer: Same thing here about Fig 7 on left and Fig 8 on right.

Author: @steveoh do you know how to do that?  I spent a bunch of time trying to figure that, too and I got nowhere.  I settled on just leaving it.

Reviewer 2: yes I know how to do that.

>   <figcaption class="caption__text">Fig 7: Plat of Zion</figcaption>

Reviewer: Footnote 7: 
Frederick G. Williams, “Revised Plat of the City of Zion, Circa Early August 1833,” The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, The Joseph Smith Papers, updated September 01, 2018, accessed March 01, 2019. https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/revised-plat-of-the-city-of-zion-circa-early-august-1833/1.

  <div class="caption">
    <a href="{{ "/images/ColonialBoston.png" | prepend: site.baseurl }}" title="click to see the full sized image">
      <img src="{{ "/images/ColonialBoston_sm.png" | prepend: site.baseurl }}" alt="Colonial Boston">
    </a>
    <p class="caption-text">Fig 8: Colonial Boston</p>
  </div>
</div>

> One of the more dominant patterns you'll see in the West is the rectangular city block. You could argue that the Mormon pioneers helped carry this development pattern west from Missouri with their Plat of Zion (Fig 7) - and their subsequent establishment of more than 700 communities. Contrast this pattern with the pre-PLSS pattern of the early colonial settlers in Boston (Fig 8).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One of the more dominant patterns you'll see in the West is the rectangular city block. You could argue that the Mormon pioneers helped carry this development pattern west from Missouri with their Plat of Zion (Fig 7) and their subsequent establishment of more than 700 communities. Contrast this pattern with the pre-PLSS pattern of the early colonial settlers in Boston (Fig 8).
```

>   <figcaption class="caption__text">Fig 8: Colonial Boston</figcaption>

Reviewer: Footnote 8: 
John Bonner, ca. 1643-1726; William Price, fl. 1725-1769; and Francis Dewing, fl. 1716-1722, “The town of Boston in New England,” Map, 1723, Norman B. Leventhal Map & Education Center, accessed March 01, 2019. https://collections.leventhalmap.org/search/commonwealth:9s161f21f.

> Large city blocks are a common theme in the West. These typically vary between 198 feet, 330 feet, and 660 feet (which is 3, 5, and 10 chains). Often, two sides of the block are 660 feet, with the adjacent sides being 198 feet or 330 feet. Looking at Portland (Fig 9), their blocks are unusually small in the West at 198 feet x 198 feet. On the other side of the spectrum, Salt Lake City (Fig 9) is known for having the largest blocks in the West at 660 feet x 660 feet. Blocks are more rectangular in San Francisco (Fig 9) and Phoenix (Fig 9), as they measure 660 feet x 198 feet and 660 feet x 330 feet, respectfully.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Large city blocks are a common theme in the West, varying between 198 feet, 330 feet, and 660 feet (which is 3, 5, and 10 chains). Often, two sides of the block are 660 feet, with the adjacent sides being 198 feet or 330 feet. Looking at Portland (Fig 9), its blocks are unusually small for the West at 198 feet x 198 feet. On the other side of the spectrum, Salt Lake City (Fig 9) is known for having the largest blocks in the West at 660 feet x 660 feet. Blocks are more rectangular in San Francisco (Fig 9) and Phoenix (Fig 9), as they measure 660 feet x 198 feet and 660 feet x 330 feet, respectively.
```

> Large city blocks are a common theme in the West. These typically vary between 198 feet, 330 feet, and 660 feet (which is 3, 5, and 10 chains). Often, two sides of the block are 660 feet, with the adjacent sides being 198 feet or 330 feet. Looking at Portland (Fig 9), their blocks are unusually small in the West at 198 feet x 198 feet. On the other side of the spectrum, Salt Lake City (Fig 9) is known for having the largest blocks in the West at 660 feet x 660 feet. Blocks are more rectangular in San Francisco (Fig 9) and Phoenix (Fig 9), as they measure 660 feet x 198 feet and 660 feet x 330 feet, respectfully.

Reviewer: Footnote 9 (For Figure 9): 
Greg Bunce, “Variations on the Western Urban Grid,” Automated Geographic Reference Center, March 01, 2019.

<div class="caption">
  <a href="{{ "/images/urban_grids.png" | prepend: site.baseurl }}" title="click to see the full sized image">
    <img src="{{ "/images/urban_grids_sm.png" | prepend: site.baseurl }}" alt="Western Urban Grid">
  </a>
  <p class="caption-text">Fig 9: Variations on the Western Urban Grid</p>
</div>

> If you have ever tried to cross the street in downtown Salt Lake City, you’ll know our intersections are extremely wide. You’ll see the Gunter Chain’s lasting mark at these intersections as well. Looking at Portland (Fig 9) and Salt Lake City (Fig 9) again and you’ll notice two variations of the chain. Salt Lake City (Fig 9) has large intersections that are based on two chain lengths (132 feet), whereas in Portland and San Francisco intersections measure half a chain (33’). In Phoenix (Fig 9), you’ll notice intersections measure one full chain length (66 feet).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you have ever tried to cross the street in downtown Salt Lake City, you probably know that our intersections are extremely wide. You can see the Gunter Chain’s lasting mark at these intersections as well. Looking at Fig 9 again, you’ll notice variations of the chain. Salt Lake City (Fig 9) has large intersections that are based on two chain lengths (132 feet), whereas, in Portland and San Francisco, intersections measure half a chain (33’). In Phoenix (Fig 9), you’ll notice intersections measure one full chain length (66 feet).
```

## Section Lines and Addressing
{: .text-left}

> Another notable mention are “section line roads”. These roads are laid out in a one-mile by one-mile grid pattern that follow the section lines. Figure 10 shows a good example of this southwest of Boise, Idaho. This pattern is also very popular in Phoenix and Las Vegas.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another notable mention are “section line roads.” These roads are laid out in a one-mile by one-mile grid pattern that follows the section lines. Figure 10 shows a good example of this southwest of Boise, Idaho. This pattern is also very popular in Phoenix and Las Vegas.
```

> Section lines in North Dakota and South Dakota are often used as the basis for their street numbering systems. In Salt Lake City, a similar section-based addressing system is used, where the 100 blocks (ex: from 100 E to 200 E) are ten chains, or 660 feet, or quarter-quarter-quarter sections (10 chains or 660 feet).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Section lines are also often used as the basis for street numbering systems, such as in North Dakota and South Dakota. In Salt Lake City, a similar section-based addressing system is used, where 100 blocks (e.g., from 100 E to 200 E) are ten chains, or 660 feet, or quarter-quarter-quarter sections.
```

Reviewer: Also, I'm not completely sure what we mean here with "100 blocks"?

> One last notable Western development pattern is the disguised grid. These are often large communities. The land is typically purchased by the section (or more) and then made to feel less grid-like. Two good examples of this are Sun Lakes (Fig 11) and Sun City in Arizona. As you move through these communities you forget that you're on the grid.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One last notable Western development pattern is the disguised grid. These are often large communities where the land is typically purchased by the section (or more) and then is made to feel less grid-like. Two good examples of this are Sun Lakes (Fig 11) and Sun City in Arizona. As you move through these communities, you forget that you're on the grid.
```

<div class="caption">
  <a href="{{ "/images/SectionLineRoads.png" | prepend: site.baseurl }}" title="click to see the full sized image">
    <img src="{{ "/images/SectionLineRoads_sm.png" | prepend: site.baseurl }}" alt="Section Line Roads Southwest of Boise, ID">
  </a>

>   <p class="caption-text">Fig 10: Section Line Roads Southwest of Boise, ID</p>

Reviewer: And again with the fig 10 on left, fig 11 on right

Author: @steveoh do you know how to do that?  I spent a bunch of time trying to figure that, too and I got nowhere.  I settled on just leaving it.

Reviewer 2: yes I know how to do that.

>   <figcaption class="caption__text">Fig 10: Section Line Roads Southwest of Boise, ID</figcaption>

Reviewer: Footnote 10: 
Google Maps, “Boise Idaho,” accessed March 01, 2019. https://www.google.com/maps/place/Boise,+ID/@43.6088162,-116.3498057,7348m/data=!3m1!1e3!4m5!3m4!1s0x54aef172e947b49d:0x9a5b989b36679d9b!8m2!3d43.6150186!4d-116.2023137.

</div>

<div class="caption">
  <a href="{{ "/images/SunLakes_grid.png" | prepend: site.baseurl }}" title="click to see the full sized image">
    <img src="{{ "/images/SunLakes_grid_sm.png" | prepend: site.baseurl }}" alt="Sun City, AZ (Disguising the Grid)">
  </a>
  <p class="caption-text">Fig 11: Sun City, AZ (disguising the grid)</p>
</div>

> It's remarkable how a few key points in history have permanently affected the growth and development patterns in the Western United States. It's also interesting how these same decisions have made it difficult for us to turn our backs on the imperial-based measurement system (United States customary units).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's remarkable how a few key points in history have permanently affected the growth and development patterns in the Western United States. It's also interesting how these same decisions have made it difficult for us to turn our backs on the imperial-based measurement system (i.e., United States customary units).
```

> So, the next time you're out wandering the Western grid and you encounter a large intersection or a big city block, you can think back to Edmund Gunter, The Treaty of Paris, and Thomas Jefferson.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So, the next time you're out wandering the Western grid and you encounter a large intersection or a big city block, you can think back to Edmund Gunter, the Treaty of Paris, and Thomas Jefferson.
```

>   <figcaption class="caption__text">Fig 11: Sun City, AZ (disguising the grid)</figcaption>

Reviewer: Footnote 11: 
Google Maps, “Sun Lakes, Arizona,” accessed March 01, 2019. https://www.google.com/maps/place/Sun+Lakes,+AZ+85248/@33.2181668,-111.8759392,3672m/data=!3m1!1e3!4m5!3m4!1s0x872b000a3cf645db:0xeb2fbae417540df7!8m2!3d33.2181797!4d-111.8759103.

> So, the next time you're out wandering the Western grid and you encounter a large intersection or a big city block, you can think back to Edmund Gunter, the Treaty of Paris, and Thomas Jefferson.

Reviewer: After the article, we'll need to add in the footnotes (as mentioned in prev comments), as well as the sources list. Not sure of the best way to add these in, so here they are! 

American Publishing Company. “Salt Lake City 1891 Bird's Eye View.” _Historic Map Works_, Residential Genealogy. Accessed March 1, 2019. http://www.historicmapworks.com/Atlas/US/9286/Salt+Lake+City+1891+Bird%27s+Eye+View/.

Bonner, John, ca. 1643-1726,  Price, William, fl. 1725-1769, and Dewing, Francis, fl. 1716-1722. “The town of Boston in New England.” Map. 1723. _Norman B. Leventhal Map & Education Center_. Accessed March 01, 2019. https://collections.leventhalmap.org/search/commonwealth:9s161f21f.

Bunce, Greg. “Variations on the Western Urban Grid.” _Automated Geographic Reference Center_. March 01, 2019.  

Golbez. “States and Territories of the United States of America August 7 1789 to April 2 1790.” _Wikipedia_, “Northwest Territory” page. Accessed March 1, 2019.

Google Maps. “Boise Idaho.” Accessed March 01, 2019. https://www.google.com/maps/place/Boise,+ID/@43.6088162,-116.3498057,7348m/data=!3m1!1e3!4m5!3m4!1s0x54aef172e947b49d:0x9a5b989b36679d9b!8m2!3d43.6150186!4d-116.2023137.

Google Maps. “Sun Lakes, Arizona.” Accessed March 01, 2019. https://www.google.com/maps/place/Sun+Lakes,+AZ+85248/@33.2181668,-111.8759392,3672m/data=!3m1!1e3!4m5!3m4!1s0x872b000a3cf645db:0xeb2fbae417540df7!8m2!3d33.2181797!4d-111.8759103. 

“Great Salt Lake Meridian/Base Marker.” _HowderFamily.com_. Updated August 13, 2013. Accessed March 01, 2019. https://www.howderfamily.com/travel/utah/great-salt-lake-base-and-meridian.html.

“Gunter Chain.” (Article.)  _Smithsonian National Museum of American History_. Accessed March 01, 2019. http://americanhistory.si.edu/collections/search/object/nmah_761634.  

“Gunter Chain.” (Image.) John Johnson (owner). _Smithsonian National Museum of American History_. Accessed March 01, 2019. http://americanhistory.si.edu/collections/search/object/nmah_761634.  

“Projections and Survey Systems.” (Article.) _San Francisco Estuary Institute & The Aquatic Science Center_. Accessed March 01, 2019. https://www.sfei.org/it/gis/map-interpretation/projections-and-survey-systems#sthash.D2D94lF3.sWlKZBU3.dpbs.

“Revised Plat of the City of Zion, circa Early August 1833.” p. [1]. _The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, The Joseph Smith Papers_. Accessed March 01, 2019. https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/revised-plat-of-the-city-of-zion-circa-early-august-1833/1.

Sellers, Christine and Martin, James. “The Articles of Confederation: The First Constitution of the United States.” _Library of Congress_. Published September 16, 2011. Accessed March 01, 2019. https://blogs.loc.gov/law/2011/09/the-articles-of-confederation-the-first-constitution-of-the-united-states/.    

United States Bureau of Land Management. “Principal Meridians and Base Lines.” (Image.) _US Geological Survey_. Updated January 18, 2018. Accessed March 01, 2019.  https://nationalmap.gov/small_scale/a_plss.html.

United States Bureau of Land Management. “The Public Land Survey System (PLSS).” (Article.) _US Geological Survey_. Updated January 18, 2018. Accessed March 01, 2019.  https://nationalmap.gov/small_scale/a_plss.html.

“US Public Land Survey System.” (Image.) _San Francisco Estuary Institute & The Aquatic Science Center_. Accessed March 01, 2019. https://www.sfei.org/it/gis/map-interpretation/projections-and-survey-systems#sthash.D2D94lF3.sWlKZBU3.dpbs.

Williams, Frederick G. “Revised Plat of the City of Zion, Circa Early August 1833.” _The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, The Joseph Smith Papers_. Updated September 01, 2018. Accessed March 01, 2019. https://www.josephsmithpapers.org/paper-summary/revised-plat-of-the-city-of-zion-circa-early-august-1833/1.

Wright, Bryan. “Gunter’s Chain: Early Surveying in America.” _Colonial Sense_. Accessed March 01, 2019. http://www.colonialsense.com/Society-Lifestyle/Signs_of_the_Times/Gunter%27s_Chain.php.
